WebVTT - general restructure to match normal API docs (#34034)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/webvtt_api/web_video_text_tracks_format/index.md

The structure of a WebVTT consists of the following components, some of them optional, in this order:

- A header, consisting of an optional byte order mark (BOM), the string "`WEBVTT`", followed by an optional text header, separated by one or more space or tab characters (in WebVTT files, tab and space characters are interchangeable).
- One or more blank lines, each which is equivalent to two consecutive newlines.
- Zero or more `STYLE`, `REGION`, or `NOTE` blocks, separated by one or more blank lines.
- Zero or more cue or `NOTE` blocks, separated by one or more blank lines.

A simple WebVTT file that has the `WEBVTT` string (but no header text), a NOTE block, and two cues is shown below:

```plain
WEBVTT

NOTE This is a multi-line note block.
These are used for comments by the author
Two cue blocks are defined below.

00:01.000 --> 00:04.000
Never drink liquid nitrogen.

00:05.000 --> 00:09.000
Because:
- It will perforate your stomach.
- You could die.
```

The following sections explain the parts of the file, including those not used in the example above.

## WebVTT Header

The WebVTT files should start with a header block that has the following properties:

> - An optional byte order mark (BOM).

Author: No, it's a byte order mark THEN the string WEBVTT. This was copied, but I guess I should list it. Something for Friday.

> - An optional byte order mark (BOM).

Author: ```suggestion
- An optional byte order mark (BOM), which is Unicode character `U+FEFF`.
```

> - The string "`WEBVTT`".

Author: No, as above.

The cue settings are added to the right of the cue timings. There must be one or more spaces between the cue timing and the first setting and between each setting. A setting's name and value are separated by a colon. The settings are case sensitive so use lower case as shown. There are five cue settings:

- `vertical`
  - : Indicates that the text will be displayed vertically rather than horizontally, such as in some Asian languages. There are two possible values:
    - `rl`
      - : The writing direction is right to left
    - `lr`
      - : The writing direction is left to right
- `line`

  - : If vertical is not set, specifies where the text appears vertically. If vertical is set, line specifies where text appears horizontally. Its value can be:

    - a line number
      - : The number is the height of the first line of the cue as it appears on the video. Positive numbers indicate top down and negative numbers indicate bottom up.
    - a percentage

>       - : It must be an integer (i.e., no decimals) between 0 and 100 inclusive and must be followed by a percent sign (%).

Author: FWIW they know what a percentage value is, but they don't necessarily know whether the % has to be specified.

    | -------------- | --------------------- | ------------------- | ------------------- |
    | `align:start`  | left                  | top                 | top                 |
    | `align:center` | centered horizontally | centered vertically | centered vertically |
    | `align:end`    | right                 | bottom              | bottom              |

Here are a few examples.
The first line demonstrates no settings. The second line might be used to overlay text on a sign or label. The third line might be used for a title. The last line might be used for an Asian language.

```plain
00:00:05.000 --> 00:00:10.000
00:00:05.000 --> 00:00:10.000 line:63% position:72% align:start
00:00:05.000 --> 00:00:10.000 line:0 position:20% size:60% align:start
00:00:05.000 --> 00:00:10.000 vertical:rt line:-1 align:end
00:00:05.000 --> 00:00:10.000 position:10%,line-left align:left size:31%
00:00:05.000 --> 00:00:10.000 position:90% align:right size:35%
00:00:05.000 --> 00:00:10.000 position:45%,line-right align:center size:90%
```

### Cue payload

The payload is where the cue content is defined, such as the subtitle or closed caption text.

> The payload text may contain newlines but it cannot contain two consecutive newlines: that would create a blank line, which signifies the end of a cue.

Author: ```suggestion
It may contain newlines but cannot contain two consecutive newlines: that would create a blank line, which indicates the end of the block.
```

    The _active text_ is the text between the timestamp and the next timestamp or to the end of the payload if there is not another timestamp in the payload.
    Any text before the _active text_ in the payload is _previous text_.
    Any text beyond the _active text_ is _future text_.

    ```plain
    1
    00:16.500 --> 00:18.500
    When the moon <00:17.500>hits your eye

    1
    00:00:18.500 --> 00:00:20.500
    Like a <00:19.000>big-a <00:19.500>pizza <00:20.000>pie

    1
    00:00:20.500 --> 00:00:21.500
    That's <00:00:21.000>amore
    ```

The following tags are the HTML tags allowed in a cue and require opening and closing tags (e.g., `<b>text</b>`).
Text marked up with these tags can be formatted in [`STYLE` blocks](/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebVTT_API/Web_Video_Text_Tracks_Format#style_blocks) using the {{cssxref("::cue")}} pseudo-element.

- Italics tag (`<i></i>`)

  - : Italicize the contained text.

    ```xml
    <i>text</i>
    ```

- Bold tag (`<b></b>`)

  - : Bold the contained text.

    ```xml
    <b>text</b>
    ```

- Underline tag (`<u></u>`)

  - : Underline the contained text.

    ```xml
    <u>text</u>
    ```

- Class tag (`<c></c>`)

>   - : Style the contained text using a CSS class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - : Add a class to the contained text for selection via CSS.
```

    ```xml
    <c.classname>text</c>
    ```

> - Ruby tag (`<ruby></ruby>`)

Reviewer: Would it be worth linking these to their respective reference pages, e.g. https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/ruby?

Author: No-ish. 
I'd like to, but then we'd be implying they are those tags. It is more true to say that they are tags that just happen to have the same meaning as in HTML. Semantics - yes, but this is "safer".

    ```

- Ruby text tag (`<rt></rt>`)

  - : Used with ruby tags to display [ruby characters](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruby_character) (i.e., small annotative characters above other characters).

    ```xml
    <ruby>WWW<rt>World Wide Web</rt>oui<rt>yes</rt></ruby>
    ```

- Voice tag (`<v></v>`)

  - : Similar to class tag, also used to style the contained text using CSS.

    ```xml
    <v Bob>text</v>
    ```

- Lang tag (`<lang></lang>`)

  - : Used to highlight text that has been marked up as belonging to a particular language or language variant using the format defined in {{RFC(5646, "Tags for Identifying Languages (also known as BCP 47)")}}.

    ```xml
    <lang en-GB>Engish text as spoken in Great Britain!</lang>
    ```

## NOTE blocks

NOTE blocks are optional sections that can be used to add comments to a WebVTT file.
They are intended for those reading the file and are not seen by users.
For example, you might use them to record author contact details, provide an overview of your structure, or add placeholders for cues that still need to be written.

They can be used anywhere in the WebVTT file after the header.

> NOTE blocks may contain newlines but cannot contain two consecutive newlines, as this is a blank line and indicates the end of the block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE blocks may contain newlines but cannot contain two consecutive newlines: that would create a blank line, which indicates the end of the block.
```

A comment cannot contain the string `-->`, the ampersand character (`&`), or the less-than sign (`<`).
If you wish to use these characters, you need to instead use a {{glossary("character reference")}} such as `&amp;` for ampersand and `&lt;` for less-than.
It is also recommended that you use the greater-than escape sequence (`&gt;`) instead of the greater-than character (`>`) to avoid confusion with tags.

A comment consists of three parts:

- The string `NOTE`.
- A space or a newline.
- Zero or more characters other than those noted above.

> Below we show a number of examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are some examples:
```

```plain
NOTE This is a single line comment

NOTE
This is a simple multi line comment

NOTE
One comment that is spanning
more than one line.

NOTE You can also make a comment
across more than one line this way.

NOTE TODO I might add a line to indicate work that still has to be done.
```

## STYLE Blocks

`STYLE` blocks are optional sections that can be used to embed CSS styling of cues within a WebVTT file.
Note that these are used to style the appearance and size of the cues, but not their position and layout, which are controlled by the [Cue settings](#cue_settings).

> > **Note:** WebVTT cues can also be match by CSS styles loaded by the associated [document embedding the video/audio element](/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebVTT_API#styling_webvtt_in_html_or_a_stylesheet).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** WebVTT cues can also be matched by CSS styles loaded by the associated [document embedding the video/audio element](/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebVTT_API#styling_webvtt_in_html_or_a_stylesheet).
```

`STYLE` blocks must appear before any cue blocks in the file.

> Each block consists of the lines:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each block consists of the following lines:
```

- The String `STYLE` followed by zero or more space or tab characters, and then a newline.
- A string defining the CSS styles to match and apply, using the {{cssxref("::cue")}} pseudo-element.

The block cannot cannot contain the string `-->`.

> It may contain newlines but cannot contain two consecutive newlines, as this is a blank line and indicates the end of the block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It may contain newlines but cannot contain two consecutive newlines: that would create a blank line, which indicates the end of the block.
```

A simple WebVTT files with two `STYLE` blocks is shown below.

> This uses {{cssxref("::cue")}} to first apply a style to all cue text, and then to apply just to text that is tagged between `<b>` start and end tags

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This uses {{cssxref("::cue")}} to apply a text color to all cue text, and a different text color just to text that is tagged with `<b></b>` tags.
```

```plain
WEBVTT

STYLE
::cue {
  background-image: linear-gradient(to bottom, dimgray, lightgray);
  color: papayawhip;
}
/* Style blocks cannot use blank lines nor "dash dash greater than" */

NOTE comment blocks can be used between style blocks.

STYLE
::cue(b) {
  color: peachpuff;
}

00:00:00.000 --> 00:00:10.000
- Hello <b>world</b>.

NOTE style blocks cannot appear after the first cue.
```

> **Note:** There are live examples demonstrating many of the following cases in [More cue styling examples](/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebVTT_API#more_cue_styling_examples) in _WebVTT API_.

### Match all cue payload text

Match on all cue payload text using {{cssxref("::cue")}}.

> For example, the following `STYLE` block would match all cue text and color it as yellow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following `STYLE` block would match all cue text and color it yellow.
```

Match cue text marked up with particular [cue payload text tags](#cue_payload_text_tags), such as `c`, `i`, `b`, `u`, `ruby`, `rt`, `v`, and `lang`, by specifying the tag in {{cssxref("::cue()")}} as a type selector.

For example, the following block would match cue payload text marked up with `lang` as yellow, and each of the other tags as red.

```plain
STYLE
cue(c),
cue(i),
cue(b),
cue(u),
cue(ruby),
cue(rt),
cue(v) {
  color: red;
}
cue(lang) {
  color: yellow;
}
```

### Match a class selector

Match all tags marked up using a class selector in `::cue()`.

The `STYLE` block in the following WebVTT file would match all the text after it, because all the tags have the `myclass` class.

```plain
WEBVTT

STYLE
::cue(.myclass) {
  color: yellow;
}

00:00:00.000 --> 00:00:08.000
<c.myclass>Yellow!</c>
<i.myclass>Yellow!</i>
<u.myclass>Yellow!</u>
<b.myclass>Yellow!</b>
<u.myclass>Yellow!</u>
<ruby.myclass>Yellow! <rt.myclass>Yellow!</rt></ruby>
<v.myclass Kathryn>Yellow!</v>
<lang.myclass en>Yellow!</lang>
```

To select a particular tag and class you must specify both in `::cue()`:

```css
STYLE ::cue(b.myclass) {
  color: yellow;
}
```

### Match an attribute

> Cue payload text that is marked up with a particular tag and attribute can be matched using an attribute selector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cue payload text marked up with a particular tag and attribute can be matched using an attribute selector.
```

For example, consider the following WebVTT file, which has text marked up using using the `v` and `lang` [cue payload text tags](#cue_payload_text_tags), using attributes to specify the particular voice ("Salame") and languages.

```plain
WEBVTT

STYLE
::cue([lang="en-US"]) {
color: yellow;
}
::cue(lang[lang="en-GB"]) {
color: cyan;
}
::cue(v[voice="Salame"]) {
color: lime;
}

00:00:00.000 --> 00:00:08.000
Yellow!

00:00:08.000 --> 00:00:16.000
<lang en-GB>Cyan!</lang>

00:00:16.000 --> 00:00:24.000
I like <v Salame>lime.</v>
```

> ### Match using pseudo classes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Match using pseudo-classes
```

The previous example styled text for a particular language using attribute matching.
You can also match languages using the `:lang()` pseudo class, as demonstrated by the `STYLE` block below.

```plain
STYLE
::cue(:lang(en)) {
  color: yellow;
}
::cue(:lang(en-GB)) {
  color: cyan;
}
```

> You can similarly match with the `:past` and `:future` pseudo classes, in order to provide a karaoke-like experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can similarly match with the `:past` and `:future` pseudo-classes, to provide a karaoke-like experience.
```

```css
video::cue(:past) {
  color: yellow;
}
video::cue(:future) {
  color: cyan;
}
```

> Other pseudo classes such as `link`, `nth-last-child`, `nth-child` should work in a similar way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other pseudo-classes such as `link`, `nth-last-child`, and `nth-child` should work similarly.
```

### Match a cue id

> Match against a particular cue id by specifying the id {{cssxref("::cue()")}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Match against a particular cue `id` by specifying the `id` inside {{cssxref("::cue()")}}.
```

Author: Thanks. Note that I have not yet got id to work anywhere.

> **Note:** At time of writing this does not appear to be supported in any of the main browsers.

For example, the following WebVTT file should style the cue with identifier `cue1` in green.

```plain
WEBVTT

STYLE ::cue(#cue1) {
  color: green;
}

cue1
00:00:00.000 --> 00:00:08.000
Green!
```

> Note that the CSS uses escape sequences the way they are used in HTML pages, so you would escape the "crédit de transcription" identifier as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that escape sequences are used in WebVTT CSS in the same way as HTML pages. The below example shows how to escape spaces in a cue identifier:
```
